The development of tools has many advantages. Besides the fact that we practice and learn specific programming languages during the development process, we also understand how such programs are developed and how the communication between server and client works. This gives us a better understanding of the structures of programs and some repertoire, which will help us understand the processes faster and easier.

It is necessary to have this understanding to think outside the box and try out potential weaknesses in the program that may be present. Finally, developers also have difficulties with development, which often leads to program vulnerabilities. This could be certain functions, libraries, or even the handling of specific values.

In the next sections, we will get back to DNS and dive a little deeper. Most probably, we have already dealt with some DNS records and know what information they can provide. Working with some tools and resources is a standard approach, but it is always best to use a tool that we have written and know precisely what it does and how.

Before we start to develop our tool, we need the information we want to work with. Therefore it is essential to understand every step of the interaction with the server to track and reproduce it. To get or query this information, we need to understand how the communication between the services, in this case, DNS, works, and how it is structured.

**Credit:** This information was adapted from an excellent guide on [HTB Academy](https://academy.hackthebox.com/course/preview/dns-enumeration-using-python). Be sure to check out the original post for more details.